Baleen or whalebone is a filtering structure in the mouth of most whales, which they use to feed by sieving small animals from large mouthfuls of seawater. Instead of teeth, these whales have rows of baleen plates in the upper jaw–flat, flexible plates with frayed edges, arranged in two parallel rows, looking like combs with thick hair at the end of each comb tooth. Baleen is not in fact composed of bone, but of the protein keratin, the same substance as hair, horn, scales, claws and nails. Baleen whales use these combs for filter feeding.
Depending on the species, a baleen plate can be 0.5 to 3.5 metres (1.6 to 11 ft) long, and weigh up to 90 kilograms (200 lb). Its hairy fringes are called baleen hair or whalebone-hair. They are also called baleen bristles, which in sei whales are highly calcified, calcification functioning to increase their stiffness (Fudge et al. 2009; Szewciw et al. 2010). Baleen plates are broader at the gumline (base). The plates have been compared to sieves or Venetian blinds.
The word "baleen" derives from Early Modern English word meaning "whale". This in turn derives from the Latin balaena, related to the Greek phalaina – both of these also mean whale".
The oldest true fossils of baleen are only 15 million years old, but baleen rarely fossilizes, and scientists[who?] believe it originated considerably earlier than that. This is indicated by baleen-related skull modifications being found in fossils from considerably earlier, including a buttress of bone in the upper jaw beneath the eyes, and loose lower jaw bones at the chin. Baleen is believed to have evolved around thirty million years ago, possibly from a hard, gummy upper jaw, similar to that found on Dall's porpoise today, which is, at a microscopic level, almost identical to baleen.[clarification needed]
Curiously, many early baleen whales also had teeth, but these were probably used only peripherally, or perhaps not at all (again like Dall's porpoise, which catches squid and fish by gripping them against its hard upper jaw).
