Flensing is the removing of the outer integument (blubber) of whales. English whalemen called it "flenching", while American whalemen called it "cutting-in".
In Spitsbergen, in the first half of the seventeenth century, the processing of whales was primarily done ashore. Where the whale was flensed differed between the English and Dutch. The former brought the whale to the stern of the ship, where men in a boat cut strips of blubber from the whale's back, which were tied together and rowed ashore, where they were cut into smaller pieces to be boiled into oil in large copper kettles. The Dutch, meanwhile, eschewed this system, bringing the whales into the shallows at high-tide and flensing them at low-tide. This latter method proved much less time-consuming and thus more effective. Both parties only cut off the blubber and the head, leaving the rest of the carcass to polar bears and sea birds.[1]
In Japan, on the other hand, the whole carcass was utilized. During the open-boat whaling era in Japan (1570s-1900s) whales were winched ashore by large capstans. There, men with flensing knives would not only cut up the blubber into long strips with the assistance of these capstans, but also cut up the viscera and bones to make various products.
Shore whaling flensing methods elsewhere differed little from the European whaling mentioned above. In California during the nineteenth century whales could be winched ashore either at a sandy beach or, in the case of the Carmel Bay station just south of Monterey, they were brought to the side of a stone-laid quay to be flensed. Cutting-tackles were suspended from an elevated beam, allowing the whalemen to roll the carcass over in the water for flensing similar to a whaleship.[2] On Norfolk Island humpback whales were flensed in the shallows along a rocky beach. Men sliced the blubber from the lean with the assistance of a winch.
By the 1630s whaling had spread offshore and into the ice floes west of Spitsbergen. Here whales were flensed alongside the ship, the blubber cut into small pieces and put into casks to either be boiled into oil at a station ashore, or, by late century, on the return to port. At about the same time Basque whalers began trying-out oil aboard ship, but this appears to have met limited success: the method wasn’t fully utilized until the late eighteenth century.
