Humphrey the Whale is unquestionably the most widely publicized humpback whale in history,[1][2] having errantly entered San Francisco Bay twice, departing from his Mexico to Alaska migration. This behavior is not normal for any Humpback whale, and Humphrey became well known on national television and press coverage for his misadventures in the years 1985 and 1990. Humphrey is a member of the species Megaptera novaeangliae, and each episode of his bay excursions resulted in a dramatic estuarine rescue of this giant mammal by the Marine Mammal Center, based in Marin County, California, assisted by the United States Coast Guard and hundreds of other volunteers. Humphrey (sometimes known in the media as Humphrey the humpback whale) is 40 feet (12 m) long and weighs 80,000 pounds (36 tons). Humphrey’s last sighting was in the vicinity of the Farallon Islands in the year 1991.
In 1985, Humphrey mysteriously entered San Francisco Bay and was followed closely on the evening news by all Bay Area television stations.[3] Each evening the Bay area audience would tune in for the latest update on Humphrey’s plight, until even more amazingly he swam up the Sacramento River into a freshwater habitat. Then national media coverage began and the whole country watched the ensuing story. The whale, first spotted at Oakland's Outer Harbor October 10, 1985, swam up the Carquinez Strait, the Sacramento River and under the Rio Vista Bridge to a dead-end slough 69 miles (111 km) from the ocean.[4]
Humphrey's inability to find his way out of the slough after numerous attempts failed to coax him, kept the nation and now the world enthralled. Several weeks of being trapped in the fresh water of the Sacramento Delta was exhibiting in signs of physical stress in the whale. His skin was graying and he was becoming more and more listless. None of the traditional herding techniques were working and the world held its breath as Humphrey appeared to be dying.
As a last ditch effort and an eleventh-hour solution, Dr. Bernie Krause, an acoustician, offered the recordings he had made of humpback whale feeding songs as a possible way to lure him out. No one knew if this would work, but it was their last shot at saving Humphrey. However, to get the sounds into the water he needed a powerful speaker and amplification system that only the Navy would likely have. He contacted Greg Pless who was in charge of the underwater acoustics research laboratory for the Naval Postgraduate School in Monterey, California, where one of the few high-power J-11 underwater transducers existed in the country. Greg and his colleague Dale Galarowicz quickly gained Navy permission and rushed the equipment to Rio Vista, CA where Humphrey was last seen.
Early the next morning, the equipment was loaded onto the private yacht, Boot Legger, donated by its owner for the rescue effort. Directed to the location in the slough where Humphrey was last seen, the speaker was lowered over the side of the boat, the sounds were played, and everyone stood quietly while the eerie songs reverberated through the hull. Suddenly, Humphrey emerged from the water at the bow of the ship right where the speaker was playing, and gazed at the startled crew. The Captain quickly started down the river with Humphrey close in tow. With the assistance of numerous fish and wildlife agencies, including the Army's 481'st Transportation Company (Heavy Boat), the crew led him the many miles back down the Sacramento river, alternately playing and not playing the whale songs to keep his interest.
