The pygmy right whale (Caperea marginata) is a baleen whale, the sole member of the family Neobalaenidae. First described by John Edward Gray in 1846, it is the smallest of the baleen whales, ranging between 4 and 6.5 m in length and 3,000 and 3,500 kg in mass. Despite its name, the pygmy right whale has more in common with the gray whale and rorquals than the bowhead and right whales.
The pygmy right whale is found in the Southern Ocean in the lower reaches of the Southern Hemisphere, and feeds on copepods and euphausiids. Little is known about its population or social habits. Unlike most other baleen whales, it has rarely been subject to exploitation.
The pygmy right whale is rarely encountered and consequently little studied. However, it is known that the pygmy right is by far the smallest of the baleen whales. The birth weight and size of the animal are unknown. The estimated length of an adult is between 4 and 6.5 meters (13 and 21 feet). The estimated weight of an adult is between 3,000 and 3,500 kg (3.3 and 3.9 short tons). Gestation and lactation periods and longevity are all unknown. Part of the reason for the paucity of data may be the relative inactivity of the whale, making location for study difficult. The blow is small and indistinct and the whale is usually a slow undulating swimmer, although capable of bursts of acceleration.
The colouring and shape of the pygmy right whale, a dark grey top side and lighter grey underside, commonly with a pair of chevron-shaped lighter patches behind the eyes, is similar to that of the dwarf minke and Antarctic minke whales and at sea may easily be confused with these two species if the jaw and flippers are not carefully observed. The arched jawline is not as pronounced as other right whales and may not be sufficient to distinguish a pygmy right whale from a minke whale. The long, narrow cream-coloured baleen plates with a distinctive white gumline are the most effective discriminators. Unlike true right whales, pygmy rights do not have callosities. The dorsal fin is falcate (crescent-shaped) and located about three-quarters of the way along the back of the animal. Unlike the minke whales, occasionally the dorsal will not be seen on the whale surfacing, and the tail fin has not been observed clear of the water.
Analysis of the stomach contents of dead pygmy right whales indicates that it feeds on copepods and euphausiids. It is not known if the animal feeds close to shore or at sea. Similarly the social and mating structures are unknown. The whale is typically seen alone or in pairs, with occasional sightings of groups up to 10 strong and one report of 80 animals grouped closely in oceanic waters.
