Snow tires (winter tires) are tires designed for use in winter conditions, such as snow and ice.[1] They are an alternative to the use of snow chains.
Snow tires are usually tires with a different rubber composition from all-weather tires. Cold weather tires are designed with a larger percentage of natural rubber and silica in the compound which doesn't harden up as much as synthetic rubber in cold conditions,[2] which means that it will provide better traction at lower temperatures. Snow tires provide more small-tread areas, allowing for more traction on snow and, in wet conditions, allowing water to escape from under the tire more easily. This reduces the risk of hydroplaning. Snow tires do not eliminate skidding on ice and snow, but they greatly reduce the risk.
In the United States and Canada, a "snowflake on a mountain" symbol means that the tire has exceeded the industry requirement for a reference (non-snow) tire.
In Europe, snow tire requirements vary by country; in Austria, Estonia, Finland, Germany and Sweden, the use of snow tires is a legal requirement during winter months (usually November to mid-April) or if snow or slush is present on road surfaces. Failure to comply can result in on-the-spot fines from the police. Andorra, Italy, Norway and Switzerland all recommend snow tires but do not require it. The mandatory use of snow chains fitted to tires is more widespread, required by Andorra, Austria, France, Germany, Italy, Norway and Switzerland.[3][more citations needed]
Although there is no legal requirement to use winter tires, drivers in the United Kingdom are encouraged to use them by motoring organisations such as the AA, following the adverse winter weather conditions of 2010.[4] Conversely, the same drivers were discouraged from using winter tires by car insurance companies who, owing to a failure to understand the safety benefits, reportedly charged higher premiums to drivers who fit winter tires. This has since been clarified as incorrect practice by the Association of British Insurers (ABI).[5]
